# betaBEF-Tarim

This repository contains data and code for the manuscript entitled **"Unraveling microbial community structure-function relationships in the horizontal and vertical spatial dimensions in extreme environments"** by Jing, Xin; Classen, Aimée; Li, Daijiang; Lin, Litao; Lu, Mingzhen; Sanders, Nathan J.; Wang, Yugang; Feng, Wenting,  has been accepted for publication in Ecography (DOI: 10.1111/ecog.07118).

## Abstract
A fundamental challenge in soil macroecology is to understand how microbial community structure shapes ecosystem function along environmental gradients of the land surface at broad spatial scales (i.e., the horizontal dimension). However, little is known about microbial community structure-function relationships in extreme environments along environmental gradients of soil depth at finer spatial scales (i.e., the vertical dimension). Here, we propose a general spatial dimension partitioning approach for assessing the patterns and drivers of soil microbial community structure-function relationships across horizontal and vertical spatial gradients simultaneously. We leveraged a 200-km desert soil salinity gradient created by a 12-year saline-water irrigation in the Tarim basin of Taklamakan Desert. Specifically, using a general linear model, hierarchical variance partitioning, and a path model, we assessed the patterns and key ecological processes controlling spatial turnover in microbial community structure (i.e., β-diversity) and enzymatic activity relevant to carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus cycling along soil salinity gradients across study sites (horizontal dimension) and soil depths (vertical dimension). We found a decoupled relationship between soil microbial β-diversity and enzymatic activity. Differences in soil depth (on the scale of meters) were as important as geographic distance (on the scale of kilometers) in shaping bacterial and fungal β-diversity. However, the vertical and horizontal turnover in enzymatic activity was largely attributed to an increase in the heterogeneity of soil properties, such as soil texture, water content, and pH. Our findings suggest that dispersal limitation controls microbial community β-diversity and that environmental heterogeneity, rather than soil salinization, controls enzymatic activity. Taken together, this work highlights that in the face of ongoing environmental alterations, soil depth is an under-explored spatial dimension that must be considered in soil conservation efforts as a critical factor in determining microbial community structure and function in extreme environments.

